Merry Christmas
thank you for taking the time on
Christmas day or whenever it is you're
watching this video with us I know it's
a very busy time of year
I wanted to also say thank you to
everyone who has supported us this year
whether that is to share in our videos
with your friends and your family
taking the time to understand the
economic problem better
or
just watching the videos
we've gone a lot this year it's been a
big year for the channel and you know
that's been thanks to you so thank you
and we hope you keep supporting us for
the year to come
so for Christmas I wanted to do
a Christmas message inspired by one of
my favorite British authors Charles
Dickens uh in Christmas Carol he talks
about Christmas Past Christmas present
and Christmas future
so um I thought we'd
have a video we talk about the past the
present
and the future for
us
the channel
and also
us the country
um
so yeah hope you enjoy
so for the past
what I wanted to do was was talk a
little bit about why we started this
channel
um because I don't think we've done that
yet on uh on the channel just
took the time to speak with you the
viewers about about why it was that this
got started
so most of you will know that I was a
Trader for a long time and um I was a
successful Trader
and
some of you will know that
the exact way that I made money as a
Trader was that after the 2008 crisis
I bet that
the global economy specifically the US
and UK economies would recover extremely
slowly
that there would be prolonged economic
weakness that living standards would
fall
and I believe that that would happen
because there was a structural problem
of inequality which would get worse and
worse um
and I think
the time since then has really borne
those predictions out you know since I
started making those predictions in 2011
they made me citibank's most probable
Trader in the world
um but we have also seen these continual
Falls in living conditions and life has
gotten worse and worse and worse
especially for younger families um in
this country the UK but also in many
many countries all over the world
um
now for me I started making those big
bets in 2011. and by the end of 2011
those bets made me
citibank's most profitable Trader in the
world
and um
that was a super
weird experience for me personally
because
you know on the one hand obviously it's
great
to be right you know I had a very
well-paid job which lots of people
compete really hard to get into there
are lots of super smart educated people
there
um
and most of them are wrong about the
economy and I was right and and I was
rewarded and I was paid a lot of money
and I think at that time I was 24 25 and
like a lot of
young people I was very competitive I
wanted to be successful I wanted to get
rich and it was it felt super good to be
to be the best in in the field
um
that I trained in you know um
we're filming this just after the World
Cup final and you know we saw Players
yesterday who've achieved sort of the
top thing in their in their profession
and for me being the best Trader in the
world at one of the biggest banks in the
world kind of felt the same but at the
same time I
I knew that if my predictions were right
then that would be
a disaster for
you know literally billions of people
around the world you know so I sort of
had to sit with these two things
happening at once which was
a phenomenal personal success on a
career level and a professional level
and this sort of understanding that what
does that mean
um
and I've had people ask me since you
know
do you feel guilty that you made money
betting on
on disaster basically and
personally I don't think I do feel
guilty you know maybe some psychologists
will say subconsciously he feels guilty
um
but you know for me I know that I didn't
cause those things to happen
um it was my job to to make bet some
other things would be good or things
would be bad and I thought things would
be bad
um and when I first had these ideas they
were just ideas you know um I was
confident in them but I wasn't certain
but then you watch things be bad one
year and you're right and then you watch
another year and they're right and then
another year and you start to think
oh my God maybe I'm right and and that
means that things will get worse and
worse and worse um
and in the 10 years since then we've
seen things continue to get worse um but
for me at the time
I remember a moment
you know
I've been paid millions of pounds for
betting that the global economy was
going to collapse which is interesting
and I remember one day sitting down
thinking you know what am I going to do
with all of this money you know because
you know I come from a very poor
background and
other need to spend two million pounds
yeah I wouldn't even really know how to
spend two million pounds
um
I'll I'll leave it for my kids
and then immediately afterwards you know
my job was to predict the future of the
economy I thought well
what kind of an economy what kind of a
world are my kids going to live in
um
and I realized straight away the same
thing that I believe now which is if we
don't change the way things are going
our kids will live in phenomenally
unequal worlds of of widespread poverty
and um
you know if you want to know what that
looks like you can see it now because
you you know we we have countries in
this world that are very unequal you
know go to Sao Paulo in Brazil go to
Mumbai and India go to Johannesburg in
South Africa and see what these really
unequal countries look like you know
they look like
they look like desperate poverty next to
luxury right they look like families
sleeping homeless outside luxury hotels
right they look like beautiful
estate surrounded by barbed wire aren't
you you know
I don't want my kids to live in that
world on either side of the barbed wire
you know so I decided to do something
about it
and that's why I made this channel but
actually you know
it took me a long time
to make the channel because
some people are not going to believe
this but I'm actually not a super
extroverted guy
um and I oh I didn't really want to put
my name put my face on things and you
know obviously this is a channel called
Gary's economics the logo is my face so
some people might not believe that but
um
at first I tried a lot of other things
because I didn't really want to to take
it this way you know I I volunteered at
Think Tank
I made the website which is still at
wealth economics.org to explain what
inequality does to an economy
I went back to University I did a
two-year degree at Oxford
[Music]
um
trying to convince
you know important powerful people that
things needed to change
um but over time in these spaces
I started to think more and more
all of these spaces that we devote to
the discussion of economics in our
society
that could be Oxford University or the
London School of Economics but could
also be media it could also be
government
it could also be civil service it could
be Central Banking
all of these people who are supposed to
be dealing with our economy
and I looked around a lot of these
spaces
in most cases they are filled with
wealthy Posh people from wealthy Posh
backgrounds and um
the problem with an inequality crisis is
it doesn't hurt everybody right
inequality crisis
hurt the poor a lot
and they hurt the middle
but in general they're really good for
the rich
so
you know I always remember one meeting I
had to Oxford
with these very
Posh Rich professors wearing capes in a
castle right you know that's what do you
think of the course and I said
you know I think it's a waste of time
and
and they said why and I said well why
don't you talk about the problems with
the economy and they looked at each
other and they said
what do you mean
the economy is getting better
um
I could then help but hear those two
missing words you know at the end the
economy is getting better for us
um and that is
that is why I decided to start a channel
which talks directly to Ordinary People
because I don't think that the rich
who are often in many cases benefiting
from the system are going to put their
hands out to help you
um it's going to have to be you it's
going to have to be us right
um
you know and that's why I made this
channel because I think it's important
there's a space where Ordinary People
can become educated can understand the
situation
can use that knowledge to reach up and
and bring
bring us all up and fix the system which
which if if not fixable drive us all
down
okay and that brings us to today so
let's talk about Christmas present
listen
there's no way we can talk about the
situation today without
being totally realistic about what's
happening
this
is a difficult Christmas for a lot of
people and I know for a lot of you
watching out there this is going to be
the full Christmas for you and for your
family and um
I want you to know that I'm aware of
that
um
but what I want to talk about
what I think is the most important thing
for everybody to watch this video to
understand
is that
crises of inequality
affect different people in society very
differently
so we're going to go through
a group of different people and talk
about how
Christmas and economy is looking for
them okay so
first let's talk about
people who are really struggling and
that's a lot of people you know I think
we're talking about 30 40 50 of people
now really who are who are looking at
things like can we really afford
presents can we afford heat and can we
afford food
um
you know I know what's happening I know
what's happening that you know I know
that there's parents out there that are
skipping meal so the kids can eat I know
that's happening and the kids come home
and they tell the kids we already ate
before you came home but they didn't eat
you know I know what that feels like you
know I know that's happening and if you
are out there and that's you
all I want you to know is that
first of all what's happening it's not
your fault
you know this is a systemic issue which
is designed to basically guarantee that
tens of millions of people fall into
poverty and I'm sorry that that's
happened to you
um we ain't ever going to ask anything
from you on this channel you know we do
this so that you can be supported
um
yeah
and uh just know we're going to keep
fighting we're going to keep making
things happen
but it's not just the poorest that I've
been hit
many many families who would consider
themselves completely average in the
middle I've been hit as well
you know they're looking at situations
where
they're thinking
you know what are our future's going to
be like you know maybe you own property
and you're thinking you know I wanted to
give my property to my kids but now I'm
going to sell it to support my
retirement because the cost of things
have going up so much so you're looking
at families who never consider
themselves poor in the past
being scared that they're going to lose
their property that they're going to
slip down
um and if that's you I want you to know
I understand that I understand you know
we do this for you as well you know this
this is the reason that we do this is
because
we can see that this is a system driving
ordinary families into poverty
so yeah
we're gonna keep fighting what I would
say to you is you know this is this is
for you and and this is
I wish I could tell you things were
going to get better
but I think they will only get better if
we managed to achieve the political
change that we need
and you know what now let's talk about
people who are slightly better off you
know maybe you've got better jobs and
higher incomes
and I know that even many of
those people especially young people
they're looking at their future and
they're thinking you know even Me Maybe
I own two three times average income and
I can't afford a home you know
especially if you're living in a place
like London that's very expensive you're
thinking how am I ever going to be able
to have a family have kids so I want you
to know like
just because you're earning above
average income and you know this channel
is about attacked and they're rich we're
not shooting for you you know what I
mean I was in that space as well I
worked hard to get a good job and I come
from poverty and I wanted to make money
and I wanted to own home and what we
want is to create an economy where
ordinary people can buy houses and have
families and even you know even be rich
to a degree you know we are on your side
we are for an economy where working
people can afford good quality of life
um
and now let's talk about the rich
because as we know I've spoken about a
lot on this channel the last three years
I've seen 600 billion pounds transferred
from the government to the richest
seen the fastest and quickest ever
increase in millionaire billionaire
alternation of the country never have
the rich bin as Rich never have the rich
benefited so much so quickly
so if you're rich and you're watching
this channel I would like to say you
know well done I'm rich too
congratulations
um
listen nobody's excluded from this space
you know we're going to try and build
this you know at some point we might
need to hire staff at some point we
might need funding you know what I mean
so at some point we might be out there
looking for money as well
and I'm saying everybody is allowed to
you know I'm a member of patriot
millionaires you know I went to Chile
with the patrol millionaires you know
these guys are millionaires and they're
fighting the same fight as us to make
the system more equal so just because
you are rich
you shouldn't feel guilty for being rich
but what you should feel guilty for is
if you support a system which is driving
tens of millions of people into poverty
you can be as rich as you like but you
need to support this message
because if this keeps going
you're going to destroy the basic fabric
of this country so look you're welcome
here but you need to support A system
that is fairer
but the reason I wanted to lay out all
of these different groups in society
is because
most people 70 80 people 80 of people
right now
are scared and they're legitimately
scared because 70 80 percent of the
population is getting poorer quite
quickly
and that's scary you know when you when
your family is getting poorer are you
looking at your kids you're thinking
that my kid's going to be safe you know
they're going to be able to have a
family of Their Own
and when we are in that situation where
everybody's getting hit differently and
everybody's in a different position but
everybody's scared
that creates
a dangerous possibility
for parts of the media which in many
cases are owned by billionaires
to point at you and say listen the
reason you're poor is because of them
the reason you're poor is because
the railway workers want to pay your
eyes and they want to get the money from
you the reason you're poor is because
refugees are coming over on boats
they're competing for your jobs
you're seeing it you're seeing it in the
news but it's not just that right it's
not just that
they're telling the rich you know your
pension is going to be hit they're
telling the old your pensions are going
to be hit because young people want more
State services
they're telling the young the reason
that you're poor is because older people
are owning all their houses
you know they're telling people up north
is because the money's on in London and
they're telling people in London Eyes
because the north is draining your tax
resources
because everyone is in a different
situation again it differently it
creates an opportunity for the media to
try and create Division and drive us
against each other you're seeing it in
the media now with regards to the
treatment of the strikes
look who's going on strike it's nurses
it's ambulance drivers
it's a railway workers it's postal
workers I like my dad my dad worked for
the Post Office you know these are
Ordinary People and ordinary wages in
the vast majority of of cases
and and that is the same as you
you know these people are like you
ordinary people who are scared because
they're seeing their living conditions
full
and
many sections of the press owned by
extremely wealthy people who are seeing
their wealth Skyrocket
want the state is going to say the same
are telling you you know it's because of
them
um
and I want to avoid that
and the reason I want to avoid that is
because that will affect what happens in
the future
and that brings us
to the last section which is the
Christmas future
now
look I'm good at the future
you know kids that look and sound like
me that come from East London don't get
paid millions of pounds to predict the
future in them skyscrapers in Canary
Wharf and it's really good
I'm good at the future
and let me tell you what the future
could be like if they win
if they win then that's 600 billion
pounds which I'll remind you would be 12
000 pounds for every single adult in the
country if we redistributed it we'll
stay with the rich
that will use that money to buy more
stuff driving up prices which means your
standard living will fall they'll give
that money to their kids
and then when your kids go out to buy
houses they'll be competing with kids
from Rich families who have 200 300
Grand in their pocket for mum and dad
your kids will not get houses
when you get older
everything you need for your retirement
will be more expensive
then you'll have to sell your house to
fund that retirement
property owning families will never own
properties again
the rich as they get richer and richer
they'll buy more media to convince you
that they don't have to pay taxes
they'll pay for more tax accountants to
get out of the taxes they do have to pay
that means no money for public services
the NHS will be dismantled education
will be dismantled that will be the
future for this country
if we don't deal with this massive
increase in inequality
but another future is possible too
what does that future look like
you know there was a video that was put
out by Joe dot Co dot UK I think we'll
try and Link it in the in the
description
and um I was in South America last month
talking to the Chilean government
um and somebody sent me this video they
tweeted it
and it's a guy
I guess he's from Newcastle he sounds
like he's from Newcastle who was at a
rally
um in Newcastle
and people asking him what he thought
and he was saying look
this crisis is a disgrace because as
we're struggling to heat our homes the
rich are getting richer that crazy
amount so much richer they're getting
than I was watching I was thinking yes
this is what I want to hear people
saying
and then he said you know if we took
that money back if we redistributed it
we could give every single person 12 000
pounds and I was thinking like this
guy's watching the channel
and then he turned around and he said
have you been watching Gary's economics
this guy Gary Stevenson will explain it
look for me obviously I felt a great
sense of Pride but also
this is why I do this
I do this because if Ordinary People
understand what's happening then they
can share
the basic understanding the basic facts
with their friends with their family
with their Community with the media
and then everybody can understand if
everybody knew that if we were to tax
the rich just enough to make them as
rich as they were at the beginning of
covid we could give every single adult
in the country twelve thousand pounds
then it would be obvious how to fix this
crisis the reason people accept that is
because they don't know
and if people knew if people understood
then we could fix this so for me
another future is possible
where instead of inequality rising and
rising and rising and living standards
falling and falling and falling we start
bringing inequality down
and then and living standards start to
rise those assets start going back to
all the no working people so that if you
work hard to your income you can afford
the home you can even afford to get rich
but you can move back to a society like
my parents lived in where ordinary
working people are able to get rich from
their work
that's possible man your kids and your
grandkids can live in a world where life
is good where things are affordable
where housing and families are
affordable for ordinary working people
so listen
we're going to keep working towards this
um
I promise you that
I'm going to keep pushing and pushing
I'm not going to stop
um and I know that many of you even
those of you who are struggling want to
help and I know that because I get those
messages every day and I would like to
say how much I appreciate those messages
and the people that the people that see
me in the street the people the guy who
saw me little
I appreciate all of that you know I
appreciate all the support keep doing it
and I wish I could apply to all of you
but I can't because I'm too busy but I
will keep pushing
and I know a lot of you want to help and
sometimes when I get these messages it's
a bit overwhelming for me because I feel
like I wish I could give you things to
do you know but
at this stage
I just want you to support and help grow
but in this one instance on Christmas I
am going to ask you to do something
and look it's Christmas today so many of
you are going to be spending it with
your with your family or with your
friends
and I want you to take the time today
if at all possible
to reach out to somebody or or the
people who are closest to you
and just let them know that that you are
there for them and that you care about
them
the reason I say that
is
I honestly believe
whether we win this fight or whether we
lose this fight is going to be about
whether
the billionaire owned media is able to
convince us to be divided and to hate
each other
and because so many of us are in so many
different situations and positions they
can find differences to drive us against
each other
but for me the antidote to that is is
our communities and our connections to
one another
you know if you know somebody from a
different Community or from a different
part of the country or in a different
financial situation if we all know each
other then we can see what's happening
here which is 70 80 90 of us are being
dragged down and in some cases that's
into serious poverty and in other cases
that might just be towards Financial
insecurity
but we are all being dragged down here
while the rich make themselves richer at
the fastest rate in the history of the
country
um
but they can only do that if we're
divided if we stand together
then we can stop them
so I would ask you today on Christmas
day or whenever you're watching this
take a bit of time to reach out to the
people who are closest to you
um
checking on how they are man because
it's a difficult time for a lot of
people right now it's Christmas and a
lot of families are struggling
um
look this is not going to be something
that goes away quickly
this is going to get worse
um
until we start winning
and we're going to need each other
so we have to be there for each other so
um yeah
be there for your people and send them a
message
um
thank you so much for your support this
year we're going to keep going
Merry Christmas